Radius Flux Controller Technical Design (#79)
radius-project/design-notes: tools/2025-01-gitops-technical-design.md

## Overview

<!--
Provide a succinct high-level description of the component or feature and
where/how it fits in the big picture. The overview should be one to three
paragraphs long and should be understandable by someone outside the Radius
team. Do not provide the design details in this, section - there is a
dedicated section for that later in the document.
-->

The Radius Flux Controller is a new Radius control plane service that, along with the Radius DeploymentTemplate Controller, enables GitOps practices for Radius users. It is responsible for reading the Git repository, compiling Bicep files, and creating the DeploymentTemplate resources on the cluster. This controller ensures that the infrastructure defined in the Git repository is accurately reflected in the Kubernetes cluster, enabling a seamless GitOps workflow.

## Terms and definitions

<!--
Include any terms, definitions, or acronyms that are used in
this design document to assist the reader. They may or may not
be part of the user-facing experience once implemented, and can
be specific to this design context.
-->

- **GitOps**: A set of practices to manage infrastructure and application configurations using Git.

> - **Bicep**: A domain-specific language (DSL) for deploying Azure resources declaratively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Bicep**: A domain-specific language (DSL) for managing resources; originally developed to deploy Azure resources declaratively, Radius uses Bicep to model applications and resources agnostic of a cloud provider.
```

- **DeploymentTemplate**: A custom resource in Kubernetes that represents the desired state of a Bicep deployment.

## Objectives

<!--
Describe goals/non-goals and user-scenario of this feature to understand
the end-user goals.
* If the feature shares the same objectives of the existing design, link
  to the existing doc and section rather than repeat the same context.
* If the feature has a scenario, UX, or other product feature design doc,
  link it here and summarize the important parts.
-->

> **Issue Reference:** #6689

### Goals

<!--
Describe goals to define why we are doing this work, how we will make
priority decisions, and how we will determine success.
-->

- Enable seamless integration of GitOps workflows with Radius + Bicep. Users should be able to specify their Bicep files and parameters in a Git repository and have the resources within them automatically deployed to their Kubernetes cluster.

> - Ensure that the infrastructure defined in the Git repository is accurately reflected in the Kubernetes cluster. This includes creating, updating, and deleting resources as necessary, based on the changes in the Git repository.

Reviewer: Very quickly "the Kubernetes cluster" will be not precise enough as we will support deploying to external Kubernetes clusters. This fact made me question where the CRs are created, in the cluster hosting Radius or in the cluster hosting the application.

Author: the CRs should be created on the cluster hosting radius. this should enable us to do things like multicluster or other platforms (serverless)

- Provide an experience that is consistent with existing Flux workflows. Users should be able to use Flux as they do today, with the addition of the Radius Flux Controller for managing Bicep files.

### Non goals

<!--
Describe non-goals to identify something that we won’t be focusing on
immediately. We won’t be expending any effort on these matters. If there
will be follow-ups after this work, list them here. If there are things
we plan to do in the future, but are out of scope of this design, list
them here. Provide a brief explanation on why this is a non-goal.
-->

> - Supporting non-Flux GitOps tools (e.g., ArgoCD).

Author: Non-goal for Radius helm support

> - Supporting non-Bicep IaC formats.

Reviewer: Radius only supports Bicep for application definitions but supports Bicep and Terraform for recipes. Does this solution support Terraform recipes?

Author: true, I'll re-word this

> - Radius Dashboard support

Reviewer 2: Can you elaborate on what specifically won't be supported in Radius Dashboard? I'm assuming gitops "clickops" via dashboard UI won't be supported, but things like App Graph will still get updated when resources are changed by Flux-triggered operations?

Author: I'll elaborate here. I meant that "Radius GitOps" (status of DeploymentTemplate resources, GitRepositories, etc.) will not be tracked in the dashboard as part of this work. Everything Radius users have today will still be supported.

### User scenarios (optional)

<!--
Describe the user scenarios for this design. Ensure that you define the
roles and personas in these user scenarios when it requires API design.
If you have an existing issue that describes the user scenarios, please
link to that issue instead.
-->

#### Helly can use Radius and Bicep to simplify application and infrastructure management

> Helly is an infrastructure operator for an enterprise company. Her team manages a production application that is deployed on Kubernetes and uses AWS resources. To simplify the management of the application and infrastructure, Helly decides to use Radius and Bicep. She writes Bicep manifests that define the AWS resources required by the application, such as S3 buckets and RDS databases, as well as Radius resources that define container applications. Helly then uploads these Bicep files to a Git repository. She then writes a Flux configuration which includes Flux installation, Radius installation, and Flux setup for tracking her Git repository. Finally, Helly applies the Flux configuration to her Kubernetes cluster, and Radius deploys the resources defined in the Bicep manifests to the cluster. Now, any changes to the Bicep files in the Git repository are automatically reflected in the Kubernetes cluster, enabling a seamless GitOps workflow.

Reviewer 3: Bootstrapping in which Flux deploys Radius, which then receives notifications from Flux to deploy Bicep: is this a supported scenario?

Author: yes, this is already supported because Radius can be installed by a Helm chart

## Design

### High Level Design
<!--
High level overview of the data flow and key components.

Provide a high-level description, using diagrams as appropriate, and top-level
explanations to convey the architectural/design overview. Don’t go into a lot
of details yet but provide enough information about the relationship between
these components and other components. Call out or highlight new components
that are not part of this feature (dependencies). This diagram generally
treats the components as black boxes. Provide a pointer to a more detailed
design document, if one exists.
-->

The Radius Flux Controller reads the Git repository, compiles Bicep files, and creates DeploymentTemplate resources on the cluster. It interacts with the DeploymentTemplate controller to ensure that the desired state defined in the Git repository is accurately reflected in the Kubernetes cluster.

### Architecture Diagram
<!--
Provide a diagram of the system architecture, illustrating how different
components interact with each other in the context of this proposal.

Include separate high level architecture diagram and component specific diagrams, wherever appropriate.
-->

> ![Architecture Diagram Part 1](2025-01-gitops-technical-design/rfc-1.png)

Reviewer: A proper sequence diagram would be easier to parse.

![Architecture Diagram Part 2](2025-01-gitops-technical-design/rfc-2.png)

### Detailed Design: Radius Flux Controller

<!--
This section should be detailed and thorough enough that another developer
could implement your design and provide enough detail to get a high confidence
estimate of the cost to implement the feature but isn’t as detailed as the
code. Be sure to also consider testability in your design.

For each change, give each "change" in the proposal its own section and
describe it in enough detail that someone else could implement it. Cover
ALL of the important decisions like names. Your goal is to get an agreement
to proceed with coding and PRs.

If there are alternatives you are considering please include that in the open
questions section. If the product has a layered architecture, it's good to
align these sections with the product's layers. This will help readers use
their current understanding to understand your ideas.

Discuss the rationale behind architectural choices and alternative options
considered during the design process.
-->

> The Radius Flux Controller will be implemented as a new controller in the `controller` service. Here is the high-level control loop of the new controller:

Reviewer 3: I used the Radius Support Agent to generate a mermaid diagram for this because it helps me visualize the flow. Do not feel compelled to use it, but here it is:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Controller
    participant GitRepository
    participant BicepCLI
    participant DeploymentTemplate

    Controller->>GitRepository: List all GitRepository resources
    loop For each GitRepository
        Controller->>GitRepository: Parse contents of the Git repository
        alt radius-config.yaml present
            Controller->>GitRepository: Read radius-config.yaml
            Controller->>BicepCLI: Extract Bicep compilation instructions
            BicepCLI->>Controller: Compile Bicep file
            Controller->>DeploymentTemplate: Create/Update DeploymentTemplate resource
            Controller->>DeploymentTemplate: List all DeploymentTemplate resources
            Controller->>DeploymentTemplate: Delete resources not present in Git repository
        else radius-config.yaml not present
            Controller->>GitRepository: Skip repository
        end
    end
    Controller->>Controller: Repeat at regular intervals
```

> 1. The controller lists all `GitRepository` resources in the cluster.

Reviewer 4: Why does it need to list all the resources?

Author: There's no way of knowing if the git repository contains Radius definitions (Bicep files) without listing them. If the controller doesn't have access to a `GitRepository` on the cluster, then that sounds like user error.

Reviewer 5: I think Kubernetes API Server will trigger this controller once there is a creation or an update of a GitRepository resource. Please correct me if I am wrong.

Author: I should update this to be more clear.

1. For each `GitRepository`, the controller parses the contents of the Git repository.

> 1. The controller checks for a `radius-config.yaml` file in the repository. If the file is not present, then the controller skips the repository.

Reviewer 6: Will this be logged to the user that the repo was skipped?

Author: It will be logged in the radius controller logs

1. The controller reads the `radius-config.yaml` file and extracts the Bicep compilation instructions, such as the Bicep file path and parameters.
1. The controller compiles the Bicep file using the Bicep CLI, which is installed on the controller.
1. The controller creates (or updates) a `DeploymentTemplate` resource on the cluster with the compiled Bicep file as the template.

> 1. The controller lists all `DeploymentTemplate` resources in the cluster that have been created from this Git repository and deletes any resources that are not present in the Git repository.

Reviewer 5: Why do we need to list all `DeploymentTemplate` resources for the given Git repository? Aren't just the last one and the one before that enough?

Author: There may be multiple `DeploymentTemplates` that get created from one git repository (multiple root bicep files). So we need to handle the case where 2 are created on the first commit, then one is removed.

> 1. The controller repeats this process at a regular interval to ensure that the resources in the Git repository are accurately reflected in the Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer 4: What is the value for the interval?

Author: I should be more clear about what's happening here. We don't define the interval - it's handled by the kubernetes controller internals. this controller is set up to watch changes on `GitRepository` resources on the cluster, so it will trigger a Reconcile if one of these resources changes.

The following is a detailed description of the major steps in the control loop.

#### Reading the Git Repository

The code for reading the Git repository will use the Flux GitOps toolkit libraries and will be based off the example [here](https://fluxcd.io/flux/gitops-toolkit/source-watcher/).

The controller is set up to watch `GitRepository` resources in the cluster:
```go

> func (r *FluxController) SetupWithManager(mgr ctrl.Manager) error {

Reviewer 3: How is this code implementing or using the Flux GitOps toolkit referenced above?

Author: the `ArchiveFetcher` is from the flux gitops toolkit. that's the integration point with the flux source controller

	if err := mgr.GetFieldIndexer().IndexField(context.Background(), &radappiov1alpha3.DeploymentTemplate{}, deploymentTemplateRepositoryField, deploymentTemplateRepositoryIndexer); err != nil {
		return err
	}

	return ctrl.NewControllerManagedBy(mgr).
		For(&sourcev1.GitRepository{}, builder.WithPredicates(GitRepositoryRevisionChangePredicate{})).
		Complete(r)
}
```

When a `GitRepository` resource is created or updated, the controller will get the object and read the contents of the Git repository:

> ```go 

Reviewer 3: Is this part of the `SetupWithManager` function?

Author: this is in the `Reconcile()` function. I'll make this more clear

		return ctrl.Result{}, client.IgnoreNotFound(err)
	}

  ...

  // Fetch the artifact from the Source Controller
	logger.Info("Fetching artifact", "url", artifact.URL)
	if err := r.ArchiveFetcher.Fetch(artifact.URL, artifact.Digest, tmpDir); err != nil {
		logger.Error(err, "unable to fetch artifact")
		return ctrl.Result{}, err
	}
```

#### Parsing the `radius-config.yaml` File

The controller will look for a `radius-config.yaml` file in the Git repository. If the file is not present, then the controller will skip the repository. If the file is present, then the controller will read the file and extract the Bicep compilation instructions:
```go
  // Read the radius-config.yaml file
  configFile := filepath.Join(tmpDir, "radius-config.yaml")
  config, err := ioutil.ReadFile(configFile)
  if err != nil {
    logger.Error(err, "unable to read radius-config.yaml file")
    return ctrl.Result{}, err
  }

  // Parse the radius-config.yaml file
  var radiusConfig RadiusConfig
  if err := yaml.Unmarshal(config, &radiusConfig); err != nil {
    logger.Error(err, "unable to parse radius-config.yaml file")
    return ctrl.Result{}, err
  }
```

> The `radius-config.yaml` file will have the following structure:

Author: we can rename this... probably something like "radius" "gitops" "flux"

Author: renamed to `radius-gitops-config.yaml`

> Note: The structure of the `radius-config.yaml` file is subject to change. We should discuss this in the design meeting. I considered adapting the existing `.rad/config.yaml` file format, but there were too many differences between the two formats, so I decided to create a new format specifically for the Radius Flux Controller.
```yaml
config:
  bicep:
    - file: main.bicep
      parameters: main.bicepparam
      namespace: default
    - file: secondary.bicep
  providers:
    - radius:
        scope: /planes/radius/local/resourcegroups/default
    - aws:
        scope: /planes/aws/aws/accounts/000000000/regions/us-west-2
    - azure:

>         scope: 	/planes/azure/azurecloud/subscriptions/00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000/resourceGroups/my-group

Reviewer 5: How do we access the credentials for the providers? Does the code go and check the Radius environment for that?

Author: if an environment is present already with the right configuration (credentials, etc.) the deployments will use them as normal.

>         scope: 	/planes/azure/azurecloud/subscriptions/00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000/resourceGroups/my-group

Reviewer 4: What's the motivation for adding providers here, given that they are already expected to be configured in env.bicep?

Author: good point, removed

#### Creating the `DeploymentTemplate` Resource

The controller will create (or update) a `DeploymentTemplate` resource on the cluster with the compiled Bicep file as the template:
```go
  // Create the DeploymentTemplate resource
  deploymentTemplate := &radappiov1alpha3.DeploymentTemplate{
    ObjectMeta: metav1.ObjectMeta{
      Name:      radiusConfig.Name,
      Namespace: radiusConfig.Namespace,
    },
    Spec: radappiov1alpha3.DeploymentTemplateSpec{
      Template: string(compiledBicep),
    },
  }

  // Create or update the DeploymentTemplate resource
  if err := r.CreateOrUpdate(ctx, deploymentTemplate); err != nil {
    logger.Error(err, "unable to create or update DeploymentTemplate resource")
    return ctrl.Result{}, err
  }
```

#### Deleting Stale `DeploymentTemplate` Resources

The controller will list all `DeploymentTemplate` resources in the cluster that have been created from this Git repository and delete any resources that are not present in the Git repository:
```go

> 	// List all DeploymentTemplates on the cluster that are from the same git repository

Reviewer 5: Are we talking about older versions of a DeploymentTemplate for a given repository?

Reviewer 5: Can a repository have multiple DeploymentTemplates?

Author: Yes, it can have multiple.

	deploymentTemplates := &radappiov1alpha3.DeploymentTemplateList{}
	err = r.Client.List(ctx, deploymentTemplates, client.MatchingFields{deploymentTemplateRepositoryField: repository.Name})
	if err != nil {
		logger.Error(err, "unable to list deployment templates")
		return ctrl.Result{}, err
	}

	// For all of the DeploymentTemplates on the cluster, check if the bicep file
	// that it was created from is still present in the git repository. If not, delete the

> 	// DeploymentTemplate from the cluster.

Reviewer 5: If this the case, we only keep the last DeploymentTemplate that is applied to the cluster, right?

Author: in this case (the bicep file is deleted from the git repository), we should delete the deploymentTemplate which will delete the resources.

	for _, deploymentTemplate := range deploymentTemplates.Items {
		if _, err := r.FileSystem.Stat(path.Join(tmpDir, deploymentTemplate.Name)); os.IsNotExist(err) {
			// File does not exist in the git repository,
			// delete the DeploymentTemplate from the cluster
			logger.Info("Deleting DeploymentTemplate", "name", deploymentTemplate.Name)
			if err := r.Client.Delete(ctx, &deploymentTemplate); err != nil {
				logger.Error(err, "unable to delete deployment template")
				return ctrl.Result{}, err
			}

			logger.Info("Deleted DeploymentTemplate", "name", deploymentTemplate.Name)
		} else if err != nil {
			logger.Error(err, "failed to check if file exists")
			return ctrl.Result{}, err
		}
	}
```

### Detailed Design: Bicep Compilation

The Bicep compilation will be done using the Bicep CLI. The Bicep CLI itself will be present in a container image that is mounted as a volume in the controller pod. The controller will use the Bicep CLI to compile the Bicep file and return the compiled template as a string.

`deploy/images/bicep/Dockerfile`:
```Dockerfile
FROM alpine:latest

ARG TARGETARCH

RUN apk --no-cache add curl

WORKDIR /

> RUN curl -Lo bicep https://github.com/Azure/bicep/releases/latest/download/bicep-linux-x64 \

Reviewer 6: Have we thought about supporting different architectures? This is scoped to only Linux images

Author: yes, the design should support all architectures. this is a typo

Reviewer 6: Or cases where the user may want to bring their own specific version of Bicep?

- **Bicep Compilation**: The Bicep compilation will be done using the Bicep CLI. The Bicep CLI itself will be present in a container image that is mounted as a volume in the controller pod. The controller will use the Bicep CLI to compile the Bicep file and return the compiled template as a string.

### Error Handling
<!--
Describe the error scenarios that may occur and the corresponding recovery/error handling and user experience.
-->

All errors will be logged to the Kubernetes event log. We will also provide detailed error messages in the controller logs to help users troubleshoot any issues.

## Test plan

<!--
Include the test plan to validate the features including the areas that
need functional tests.

Describe any functionality that will create new testing challenges:
- New dependencies
- External assets that tests need to access
- Features that do I/O or change OS state and are thus hard to unit test
-->

- **Unit Tests**: Test the individual components of the Radius Flux Controller. There are many external dependencies that will need to be mocked, such as GitRepository objects and Bicep compilation.

> - **Functional Tests**: Test the end-to-end functionality of the Radius Flux Controller together with the DeploymentTemplate controller. This will involve creating GitRepository objects on a real Kubernetes cluster and verifying that the resources in the Bicep templates are created and updated correctly.

Reviewer 4: Thanks for including test plan section. Do we need to think about any error scenarios and performance issues for large git repos?

Author: this is a good callout - In the controller code we can configure the `MaxDownloadSize` and `MaxUntarSize` both currently set to `Unlimited` by default. I can do some more testing on this

## Security

<!--
Describe any changes to the existing security model of Radius or security
challenges of the features. For each challenge describe the security threat
and its mitigation with this design.

Examples include:
- Authentication
- Storing secrets and credentials
- Using cryptography

If this feature has no new challenges or changes to the security model
then describe how the feature will use existing security features of Radius.
-->

No new security challenges are introduced by the Radius Flux Controller. It uses the existing security features of Radius and Flux.

## Compatibility (optional)

<!--
Describe potential compatibility issues with other components, such as
incompatibility with older CLIs, and include any breaking changes to
behaviors or APIs.
-->

The Radius Flux Controller is compatible with existing Radius components and does not introduce any breaking changes.

## Monitoring and Logging

<!--
Include the list of instrumentation such as metric, log, and trace to
diagnose this new feature. It also describes how to troubleshoot this feature
with the instrumentation.
-->

> The Radius Flux Controller will be setup as another controller in the Radius controller process. It will use standard Radius and Kubernetes logging and monitoring facilities, such as Kubernetes events and logs, to provide visibility into its actions. Users will be able to troubleshoot the Radius Flux Controller by examining the logs and events generated by the controller, as is the case with other Kubernetes controllers.

Reviewer 4: > Users will be able to troubleshoot the Radius Flux Controller by examining the logs and events generated by the controller

Will be helpful if we document this.

Author: Added to the docs

Include separate high level architecture diagram and component specific diagrams, wherever appropriate.
-->

> ![Architecture Diagram Part 1](2025-01-gitops-technical-design/rfc-1.png)

Reviewer 2: are there changes needed to be made to the Flux codebase for detecting `*.bicep` file changes, or can this be done through configuration?

Author: We handle this in the controller code by detecting the `radius-gitops-config.yaml`
